# 1950s and 1960s : Pre-CPU era

## Telecommunications ##

### Networking ###

### Computers ###
#### Evolution of mainframes ####
- In the late 1950s, mainframes had only a rudimentary interactive interface (the **console**) and used sets of **punched cards**, **paper tape**, or **magnetic tape** to transfer data and programs. They operated in batch mode to support back office functions such as payroll and customer billing, most of which were based on repeated tape-based sorting and merging operations followed by line printing to preprinted continuous stationery.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mainframe_computer
- Several manufacturers and their successors produced mainframe computers from the 1950s until the early 21st century, with gradually decreasing numbers and a gradual transition to simulation on Intel chips rather than proprietary hardware. The US group of manufacturers was first known as "IBM and the Seven Dwarfs":[17]: p.83  usually Burroughs, UNIVAC, NCR, Control Data, Honeywell, General Electric and RCA, although some lists varied. Later, with the departure of General Electric and RCA, it was referred to as IBM and the BUNCH. IBM's dominance grew out of their 700/7000 series and, later, the development of the 360 series mainframes. The latter architecture has continued to evolve into their current zSeries mainframes which, along with the then Burroughs and Sperry (now Unisys) MCP-based and OS1100 mainframes, are among the few mainframe architectures still extant that can trace their roots to this early period. While IBM's zSeries can still run 24-bit System/360 code, the 64-bit zSeries and System z9 CMOS servers have nothing physically in common with the older systems. Notable manufacturers outside the US were Siemens and Telefunken in Germany, ICL in the United Kingdom, Olivetti in Italy, and Fujitsu, Hitachi, Oki, and NEC in Japan. The Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact countries manufactured close copies of IBM mainframes during the Cold War;[18] the BESM series and Strela are examples of an independently designed Soviet computer.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mainframe_computer

#### Evolution of hardware ####
**MOSFET (1959) - Bell Labs**In the 1950s, Mohamed Atalla investigated the surface properties of silicon semiconductors at Bell Labs, where he proposed a new method of semiconductor device fabrication, coating a silicon wafer with an insulating layer of silicon oxide so that electricity could reliably penetrate to the conducting silicon below, overcoming the surface states that prevented electricity from reaching the semiconducting layer. This is known as surface passivation, a method that became critical to the semiconductor industry as it made possible the mass-production of silicon integrated circuits (ICs). Building on his surface passivation method, he developed the metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) process, which he proposed could be used to build the first working silicon field-effect transistor (FET).[9][10] The led to the invention of the MOSFET (MOS field-effect transistor) by Mohamed Atalla and Dawon Kahng in 1959.[11][12] With its scalability,[13] and much lower power consumption and higher density than bipolar junction transistors,[14] the MOSFET became the most common type of transistor in computers, electronics,[10] and communications technology such as smartphones.[15] The US Patent and Trademark Office calls the MOSFET a "groundbreaking invention that transformed life and culture around the world".[15]
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiconductor_device

#### Some applications ####
- Consumer **credit card program** (1958):  Bank of America launches the first consumer credit card program in the U.S. Later becomes **VISA**.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visa_Inc.
- In 1956, IBM demonstrated the first practical example of **artificial intelligence** when Arthur L. Samuel of IBM's Poughkeepsie, New York, laboratory programmed an IBM 704 not merely to play checkers but "learn" from its own experience. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM

#### Programming languages ####
- Fortran (1956): scientific programming language
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM

## 1960s

### Telecommunications ###

### Networking ###
**ARPANET(1969)**
The Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the U.S. Department of Defense awarded contracts in 1969 for the development of the ARPANET project, directed by Robert Taylor and managed by Lawrence Roberts. ARPANET adopted the packet switching technology proposed by Davies and Baran, underpinned by mathematical work in the early 1970s by Leonard Kleinrock at UCLA. The network was built by Bolt, Beranek, and Newman.
Several early packet-switched networks emerged in the 1970s which researched and provided data networking. ARPA projects and international working groups led to the development of protocols for internetworking, in which multiple separate networks could be joined into a network of networks, which produced various standards. Bob Kahn, at ARPA, and Vint Cerf, at Stanford University, published research in 1974 that evolved into the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and Internet Protocol (IP), the two protocols of the Internet protocol suite. The design included concepts from the French CYCLADES project directed by Louis Pouzin.[5]
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_the_Internet

### Some protocols ####
- **IMP** - Interface Message Processor (1969): provided a reliable packet delivery procedure. Starting point for host-to-host communication on the ARPANET. Used until 1989. First generation of gateways, which are known today as routers.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interface_Message_Processor
- **Telnet** (1969) : application protocol used on the Internet or local area network to provide a bidirectional interactive text-oriented communication facility using a virtual terminal connection. insecure, mostly superseded by SSH.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telnet

### Computers ###

#### Evolution of hardware ####
- **CMOS (1963) - Fairchild Semiconductor** :CMOS (complementary MOS) was invented by Chih-Tang Sah and Frank Wanlass at Fairchild Semiconductor in 1963.[16] The first report of a floating-gate MOSFET was made by Dawon Kahng and Simon Sze in 1967.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiconductor_device
- The **move towards commodity computing** began when DEC introduced the PDP-8 in 1965.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity_computing
- **Intel** is founded in 1968
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intel
- **AMD** is founded in 1969
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Micro_Devices

#### Evolution of mainframes ####
- When **interactive user terminals** were introduced, they were used almost exclusively for applications (e.g. airline booking) rather than program development. Typewriter and Teletype devices were common control consoles for system operators through the early 1970s, although ultimately supplanted by keyboard/display devices.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mainframe_computer

#### Some applications ####
- **Automated Deposit Machine (1960)** : In 1960 Luther George Simjian invented an automated deposit machine (accepting coins, cash and cheques) although it did not have cash dispensing features.[17] His US patent was first filed on 30 June 1960 and granted on 26 February 1963
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_teller_machine

- In 1964, **Xerox Corporation** introduced (and patented) what many consider to be the first commercialized version of the **modern fax machine**, under the name (LDX) or Long Distance Xerography. This model was superseded two years later with a unit that would truly set the standard for fax machines for years to come. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fax

- **Interbank card network (1966)** : In 1966, Karl H. Hinke, an executive vice president at Marine Midland Bank, asked representatives of several other banks to meet him in Buffalo, New York.
Marine Midland had just launched its own regional bankcard in the Upstate New York market after Bank of America declined its request for a BankAmericard regional license on the basis that Marine Midland was too big.[11] The result of the Buffalo meeting was that several banks and regional bankcard associations soon agreed to join forces as Interbankard, Inc.,[9][10] which then became the Interbank Card Association (ICA).[7] By the end of 1967, ICA had 150 members and Hinke became ICA's chairman.[11] Bank of America eventually joined **MasterCard** as well.[1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mastercard

- **ATM (1967)** : A cash machine was put into use by Barclays Bank in its Enfield Town branch in North London, United Kingdom, on 27 June 1967
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_teller_machine

- **Airline booking (1961)**: In 1961, IBM developed the SABRE reservation system for American Airlines and introduced the highly successful Selectric typewriter.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM

- **NASA moon landing (1963)**: In 1963, IBM employees and computers helped NASA track the orbital flights of the Mercury astronauts
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM

