# 1960s

**In short:**
- Telecommunications : SPC telephone exchange deployment (Number One Electronic Switching System), T-carrier, first satelitte, fax machine, PCM exchange, PABX and  Centrex
- Networking : "Protocol" invention, Bell 103A modem, ARPANET
- Cryptography : Government controlled
- Computers :
  * Hardware : Mainframes, Typewriter and Teletype devices, communication port, LED invention
  * CPUs: first commercial MOS integrated circuit (1964), CMOS/MOS era
  * Storage :  IBM 7-track dual magnetic tape (1950s invention)
- Uses :
  * Servers : computer-assisted instruction system (1960), probabilities simulator in blackjack (1961), synthesize speech (1961), moon landing (1963), interbank card network (1966)
  * Clients : Airline booking, ATM Cash machine, first layout software, interactive user terminals
- Consumer Electronics :
  * Hardware : Shift to PCB in consumer electronics, programmable calculators, 
  * Distribution mediau : magnetic stripe invention
  * TV / screens : PAL/SECAM, CRT innovation (Sony Trinitron - 1968), first practical plasma video display (1964), TFT-LED invention (1962-1968)
  * Video games : EM games, first video game
  * Automation : Automated Deposit Machine
- Standards and protocols : IMP, Telnet, modem speed protocols
- Programming languages and frameworks : 
- Navigation : Multiple U.S. DoD research lead to GPS

## Telecommunications

- **SPC - Stored Program Control - deployment (1960s)**

Proposed and developed in the 1950s, SPC was introduced in production electronic switching systems in the 1960s. The 101ESS PBX was a transitional switching system in the Bell System to provide expanded services to business customers that were otherwise still served by an electromechanical central office switch. The first central office switch with SPC was installed at Morris, Illinois, in a 1960 trial of electronic switching, followed shortly thereafter by the first Western Electric 1ESS switch at Succasunna, NJ in 1965. Other examples of SPC-based third-generation switching systems include: British GPO TXE (various manufacturers), Metaconta 11 (ITT Europe) and the AKE, ARE and pre-digital (1970s) versions of the AXE telephone exchange by Ericsson and Philips PRX were large-scale systems in the public switched telephone network.

SPC enables sophisticated calling features. As SPC exchanges evolved, reliability and versatility increased.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stored_program_control

The Number One Electronic Switching System (1ESS) was the first large-scale stored program control (SPC) telephone exchange or electronic switching system in the Bell System. It was manufactured by Western Electric and first placed into service in Succasunna, New Jersey, in May 1965.[1] The switching fabric was composed of a reed relay matrix controlled by wire spring relays which in turn were controlled by a central processing unit (CPU).

The 1AESS central office switch was a plug compatible, higher capacity upgrade from 1ESS with a faster 1A processor that incorporated the existing instruction set for programming compatibility, and used smaller remreed switches, fewer relays, and featured disk storage.[2] It was in service from 1976 to 2017.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Number_One_Electronic_Switching_System

- **Centrex and PABX (1960s-2000s)**

 As automated electromechanical switches and later electronic switching systems gradually replaced the manual systems, the terms private automatic branch exchange (PABX) and private manual branch exchange (PMBX) differentiated them.

PBX services had always been hard to arrange for smaller companies, and many[quantify] companies realized that handling their own telephony was not their core competence. These considerations gave rise to the concept of the hosted PBX. In wireline telephony, the original hosted PBX was the Centrex service provided by telcos since the 1960s.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_telephone_system#Private_branch_exchange

Centrex is a portmanteau of central exchange, a kind of telephone exchange. It provides functions similar to a PBX, but is provisioned with equipment owned by, and located at, the telephone company premises.[1]

Centrex service was first installed in the early 1960s in New York's financial district by New York Telephone.[2][3] As of 2003, it was estimated that there were 20 million Centrex lines installed worldwide by 20 telephone companies, with the most installations in the United States (15 million), Canada (2 million), and The United Kingdom (1 million).[2] This accounted for approximately 5% of all installed business telephone lines, worldwide.[2]

In the United States, the usage of Centrex lines has fallen from 16.5 million in 2002 to 10.7 million in 2008 as users transition to IP-PBX (through VoIP).

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Centrex


- **T-carrier - T1 (1962)**

The T-carrier is a member of the series of carrier systems developed by AT&T Bell Laboratories for digital transmission of multiplexed telephone calls.
The first version, the Transmission System 1 (T1), was introduced in 1962 in the Bell System, and could transmit up to 24 telephone calls simultaneously over a single transmission line of copper wire. Subsequent specifications carried multiples of the basic T1 (1.544 Mbit/s) data rates, such as T2 (6.312 Mbit/s) with 96 channels, T3 (44.736 Mbit/s) with 672 channels, and others.
Although a T2 was defined as part of AT&T's T-carrier system, which defined five levels, T1 through T5,[1] only the T1 and T3 were commonly in use.[2][1]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T-carrier

- **Satelitte television (1962)**

The first public satellite television signals from Europe to North America were relayed via the Telstar satellite over the Atlantic ocean on 23 July 1962, although a test broadcast had taken place almost two weeks earlier on 11 July.[43] The signals were received and broadcast in North American and European countries and watched by over 100 million.[43] Launched in 1962, the Relay 1 satellite was the first satellite to transmit television signals from the US to Japan.[44] The first geosynchronous communication satellite, Syncom 2, was launched on 26 July 1963.[45]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Satellite_television

- **Modern fax machine (1964) - Xerox Corporation**

In 1964, Xerox Corporation introduced (and patented) what many consider to be the first commercialized version of the modern fax machine, under the name (LDX) or Long Distance Xerography. This model was superseded two years later with a unit that would truly set the standard for fax machines for years to come. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fax

- **Commercial communication satellite (1965)**

The world's first commercial communications satellite, called Intelsat I and nicknamed "Early Bird", was launched into geosynchronous orbit on April 6, 1965.[46] The first national network of television satellites, called Orbita, was created by the Soviet Union in October 1967, and was based on the principle of using the highly elliptical Molniya satellite for rebroadcasting and delivering of television signals to ground downlink stations.[47]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Satellite_television

- **World's first PCM (Pulse Code Modulation) exchange (1968) - UK Post Office**

The Post Office installed the world's first PCM (Pulse Code Modulation) exchange at the Empress telephone exchange near Earl's Court in London. Postmaster-General John Stonehouse opened the exchange on 11th September with an inaugural call to the Mayor of Hammersmith.
The possibilities of PCM systems for the transmission of speech had been originally developed more than 30 years earlier in 1937 by A H Reeves working in Paris for the Western Electric Company, and PCM was first patented by him in France the following year. He proposed a transmission system in which voice signals were electronically coded into strings of digital pulses, transmitted in this form, and then turned back into speech at the receiving end. His ideas were well in advance of his time, but the technique could not be economically realised until suitable components, particularly transistors, were available.
Technical advances in the early 1960s enabled the possibility for the first time of PCM providing an economic solution to the problem of providing multi-channel systems designed for speech networks. Conventional analogue transmission allowed two pairs of wires to carry two conversations at one time. PCM transmission increased this to 24 simultaneous conversations by interleaving the groups of pulses corresponding to different callers (Time Division Multiplexing), reducing the need for many new cables. PCM transmission also allowed a greater diversity of telecommunications services in addition to telephony, including facsimile and data transmission.

https://www.britishtelephones.com/histuk.htm

## Networking

- **Protocol term invention (1967)**

One of the first uses of the term protocol in a data-commutation context occurs in a memorandum entitled A Protocol for Use in the NPL Data Communications Network written by Roger Scantlebury and Keith Bartlett in April 1967.[5][6]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communication_protocol

- **Bell 103A - Touch-tone frequencies, full-duplex (1962) - Bell Labs**

Some early modems were based on touch-tone frequencies, such as Bell 400-style touch-tone modems.[5]

The Bell 103A standard was introduced by AT&T in 1962. It provided full-duplex service at 300 bit/s over normal phone lines. Frequency-shift keying was used, with the call originator transmitting at 1,070 or 1,270 Hz and the answering modem transmitting at 2,025 or 2,225 Hz.[6]

The 103 modem would eventually become a de facto standard once third-party (non-AT&T modems) reached the market, and throughout the 1970s, independently made modems compatible with the Bell 103 de facto standard were commonplace.[7] Example models included the Novation CAT and the Anderson-Jacobson. A lower-cost option was the Pennywhistle modem, designed to be built using readily available parts.[8]

Teletype machines were granted access to remote networks such as the Teletypewriter Exchange using the Bell 103 modem.[9] AT&T also produced reduced-cost units, the originate-only 113D and the answer-only 113B/C modems.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modem

In 1960 AT$amp;T came out with a 300 bps modem (for use on it's phone system). Then in 1962 it started selling Bell 103 modems to the public. Such slow and expensive modems were later mainly used for transmitting data between mainframe computers or for connecting a dumb terminal to a mainframe computer over phone lines. Many dumb terminals didn't even have a screen display, but printed on paper what you typed at the keyboard along with responses from the computer.

https://tldp.org/HOWTO/Modem-HOWTO-29.html

- **ARPANET(1969)**

The Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the U.S. Department of Defense awarded contracts in 1969 for the development of the ARPANET project, directed by Robert Taylor and managed by Lawrence Roberts. ARPANET adopted the packet switching technology proposed by Davies and Baran, underpinned by mathematical work in the early 1970s by Leonard Kleinrock at UCLA. The network was built by Bolt, Beranek, and Newman.
Several early packet-switched networks emerged in the 1970s which researched and provided data networking. ARPA projects and international working groups led to the development of protocols for internetworking, in which multiple separate networks could be joined into a network of networks, which produced various standards. Bob Kahn, at ARPA, and Vint Cerf, at Stanford University, published research in 1974 that evolved into the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and Internet Protocol (IP), the two protocols of the Internet protocol suite. The design included concepts from the French CYCLADES project directed by Louis Pouzin.[5]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_the_Internet

## Cryptography

Until the 1960s, secure cryptography was largely the preserve of governments. Two events have since brought it squarely into the public domain: the creation of a public encryption standard (DES), and the invention of public-key cryptography.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_cryptography

## Computers

### Evolution of mainframes

When **interactive user terminals** were introduced, they were used almost exclusively for applications (e.g. airline booking) rather than program development. Typewriter and Teletype devices were common control consoles for system operators through the early 1970s, although ultimately supplanted by keyboard/display devices.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mainframe_computer

### Evolution of hardware

- **RS-232 - Serial communication port (1960)**

In telecommunications, RS-232 or Recommended Standard 232[1] is a standard originally introduced in 1960[2] for serial communication transmission of data. It formally defines signals connecting between a DTE (data terminal equipment) such as a computer terminal, and a DCE (data circuit-terminating equipment or data communication equipment), such as a modem. The standard defines the electrical characteristics and timing of signals, the meaning of signals, and the physical size and pinout of connectors. 

A serial port complying with the RS-232 standard was once a standard feature of many types of computers. Personal computers used them for connections not only to modems, but also to printers, computer mice, data storage, uninterruptible power supplies, and other peripheral devices.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RS-232

- **solid-state electronic semiconductors (1961) - Texas Instruments**

Early computer memory consisted of magnetic-core memory, as early solid-state electronic semiconductors, including transistors such as the bipolar junction transistor (BJT), were impractical for use as digital storage elements (memory cells). The earliest semiconductor memory dates back to the early 1960s, with bipolar memory, which used bipolar transistors.[9] Bipolar semiconductor memory made from discrete devices was first shipped by Texas Instruments to the United States Air Force in 1961. The same year, the concept of solid-state memory on an integrated circuit (IC) chip was proposed by applications engineer Bob Norman at Fairchild Semiconductor.[10] The first bipolar semiconductor memory IC chip was the SP95 introduced by IBM in 1965.[9][10] While bipolar memory offered improved performance over magnetic-core memory, it could not compete with the lower price of magnetic-core memory, which remained dominant up until the late 1960s.[9] Bipolar memory failed to replace magnetic-core memory because bipolar flip-flop circuits were too large and expensive.[11]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiconductor_memory

- **LED invention (1962)**




- **computer mouse (1963)**

Douglas Engelbart of the Stanford Research Institute (now SRI International) has been credited in published books by Thierry Bardini,[14] Paul Ceruzzi,[15] Howard Rheingold,[16] and several others[17][18][19] as the inventor of the computer mouse. Engelbart was also recognized as such in various obituary titles after his death in July 2013.[20][21][22][23]

By 1963, Engelbart had already established a research lab at SRI, the Augmentation Research Center (ARC), to pursue his objective of developing both hardware and software computer technology to "augment" human intelligence. That November, while attending a conference on computer graphics in Reno, Nevada, Engelbart began to ponder how to adapt the underlying principles of the planimeter to inputting X- and Y-coordinate data.[14] On 14 November 1963, he first recorded his thoughts in his personal notebook about something he initially called a "bug", which in a "3-point" form could have a "drop point and 2 orthogonal wheels".[4][14] He wrote that the "bug" would be "easier" and "more natural" to use, and unlike a stylus, it would stay still when let go, which meant it would be "much better for coordination with the keyboard".[14]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_mouse

- **CMOS (1963) - Fairchild Semiconductor** 

CMOS (complementary MOS) was invented by Chih-Tang Sah and Frank Wanlass at Fairchild Semiconductor in 1963.[16] The first report of a floating-gate MOSFET was made by Dawon Kahng and Simon Sze in 1967.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiconductor_device

- **MOS (1964) - Fairchild Semiconductor**

The advent of the metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET),[12] invented by Mohamed M. Atalla and Dawon Kahng at Bell Labs in 1959,[13] enabled the practical use of metal–oxide–semiconductor (MOS) transistors as memory cell storage elements, a function previously served by magnetic cores in computer memory.[12] MOS memory was developed by John Schmidt at Fairchild Semiconductor in 1964.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiconductor_memory

-**First commercial MOS integrated circuit (1964) - General Microelectronics**

General Microelectronics introduced the first commercial MOS integrated circuit in 1964.[2] In the early 1970s, MOS integrated circuit technology allowed the integration of more than 10,000 transistors in a single chip.[3] This paved the way for VLSI in the 1970s and 1980s, with tens of thousands of MOS transistors on a single chip (later hundreds of thousands, then millions, and now billions).

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Very_Large_Scale_Integration

- **DEC PDP-8 (1965)**

The move towards commodity computing began when DEC introduced the PDP-8 in 1965.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity_computing

- **Intel** is founded in 1968

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intel

- **AMD** is founded in 1969

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Micro_Devices

### Evolution of uses

#### Servers

- **PLATO - first generalized computer-assisted instruction system (1960)**

PLATO (Programmed Logic for Automatic Teaching Operations)[1][2] was the first generalized computer-assisted instruction system. Starting in 1960, it ran on the University of Illinois' ILLIAC I computer. By the late 1970s, it supported several thousand graphics terminals distributed worldwide, running on nearly a dozen different networked mainframe computers. Many modern concepts in multi-user computing were originally developed on PLATO, including forums, message boards, online testing, e-mail, chat rooms, picture languages, instant messaging, remote screen sharing, and multiplayer video games.

PLATO was designed and built by the University of Illinois and functioned for four decades, offering coursework (elementary through university) to UIUC students, local schools, prison inmates, and other universities. Courses were taught in a range of subjects, including Latin, chemistry, education, music, Esperanto, and primary mathematics. The system included a number of features useful for pedagogy, including text overlaying graphics, contextual assessment of free-text answers, depending on the inclusion of keywords, and feedback designed to respond to alternative answers.

Rights to market PLATO as a commercial product were licensed by Control Data Corporation (CDC), the manufacturer on whose mainframe computers the PLATO IV system was built. CDC President William Norris planned to make PLATO a force in the computer world, but found that marketing the system was not as easy as hoped. PLATO nevertheless built a strong following in certain markets, and the last production PLATO system was in use until 2006.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PLATO_(computer_system)

- **Use of IBM 704 : probabilities simulator in blackjack (1961), synthesize speech (1961)**

In 1962, physicist John Larry Kelly, Jr. created one of the most famous moments in the history of Bell Labs by using an IBM 704 computer to synthesize speech. Kelly's voice recorder synthesizer vocoder recreated the song Daisy Bell, with musical accompaniment from Max Mathews. Arthur C. Clarke was coincidentally visiting friend and colleague John Pierce at the Bell Labs Murray Hill facility at the time of this speech synthesis demonstration, and Clarke was so impressed that six years later he used it in the climactic scene of his novel and screenplay for 2001: A Space Odyssey,[7] where the HAL 9000 computer sings the same song.[8][[[IBM_7090#Notable_applications#{{{section}}}|contradictory]]]

Edward O. Thorp, a math instructor at MIT, used the IBM 704 as a research tool to investigate the probabilities of winning while developing his blackjack gaming theory.[9][10] He used FORTRAN to formulate the equations of his research model.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM_704

Speech synthetisis sample :
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ebK4wX76RZ4

- **NASA moon landing program (1963) - NASA/IBM** 
 
In 1963, IBM employees and computers helped NASA track the orbital flights of the Mercury astronauts

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM

- **Interbank card network (1966) - Mastercard**

In 1966, Karl H. Hinke, an executive vice president at Marine Midland Bank, asked representatives of several other banks to meet him in Buffalo, New York.
Marine Midland had just launched its own regional bankcard in the Upstate New York market after Bank of America declined its request for a BankAmericard regional license on the basis that Marine Midland was too big.[11] The result of the Buffalo meeting was that several banks and regional bankcard associations soon agreed to join forces as Interbankard, Inc.,[9][10] which then became the Interbank Card Association (ICA).[7] By the end of 1967, ICA had 150 members and Hinke became ICA's chairman.[11] Bank of America eventually joined **MasterCard** as well.[1

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mastercard

#### Clients

- **Airline booking (1961) - SABRE/American Airlines/IBM**

In 1961, IBM developed the SABRE reservation system for American Airlines and introduced the highly successful Selectric typewriter.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM

- **ATM cash machine (1967)**

A cash machine was put into use by Barclays Bank in its Enfield Town branch in North London, United Kingdom, on 27 June 1967

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_teller_machine

- **Sketchpad - first graphical computer-aided design program (1963)**

Ivan Sutherland developed Sketchpad in 1963, widely held as the first graphical computer-aided design program. It used a light pen to create and manipulate objects in engineering drawings in realtime with coordinated graphics. In the late 1960s, researchers at the Stanford Research Institute, led by Douglas Engelbart, developed the On-Line System (NLS), which used text-based hyperlinks manipulated with a then-new device: the mouse. (A 1968 demonstration of NLS became known as "The Mother of All Demos.") 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphical_user_interface

- **TJ-2 (Type Justifying Program) -  First page layout program (1963) Peter Samson**

published by Peter Samson in May 1963 and is thought to be the first page layout program. Although it lacks page numbering, page headers and footers, TJ-2 is the first word processor to provide a number of essential typographic alignment and automatic typesetting features:
Columnation, indentation, margins, justification, and centering
Word wrap, page breaks and automatic hyphenation
Tab stop simulation

Developed from two earlier Samson programs, Justify[1] and TJ-1,[2] TJ-2 was written for the PDP-1 that was donated to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1961 by Digital Equipment Corporation.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TJ-2

### Some standards and protocols
**[`^        back to top        ^`](#)**

### Network layer
- **IMP - Interface Message Processor (1969)**

provided a reliable packet delivery procedure. Starting point for host-to-host communication on the ARPANET. Used until 1989. First generation of gateways, which are known today as routers.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interface_Message_Processor

- **Modem speed protocols**

  * Bell 103 300 bps; frequency shift keying = FSK (1962)
  * V.21 300 bps; frequency shift keying (used a different frequency than Bell 103) (1964)
  * V.23 1200/75 bps and 600/75 bps asymmetric; 75 bps is the reverse channel; frequency shift keying = FSK (1964)
  * Bell 212A 1200 bps; quadrature differential phase shift keying = QDPSK = DPSK (1963?)

https://tldp.org/HOWTO/Modem-HOWTO-29.html

### Application layer
- **Telnet (1969)**

application protocol used on the Internet or local area network to provide a bidirectional interactive text-oriented communication facility using a virtual terminal connection. insecure, mostly superseded by SSH.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telnet


## Some programming languages and frameworks
**[`^        back to top        ^`](#)**


## Consumer electronics
**[`^        back to top        ^`](#)**

### Calculators

- **Olivetti Programma 101 (1965) - Olivetti**

First produced in 1965, the Programma 101 was one of the first **printing programmable calculators**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_personal_computers#The_beginnings_of_the_personal_computer_industry

### Hardware

- **Shift to PCB (1960s)**

Even as circuit boards became available, the point-to-point chassis construction method remained in common use in industry (such as TV and hi-fi sets) into at least the late 1960s. Printed circuit boards were introduced to reduce the size, weight, and cost of parts of the circuitry. In 1960, a small consumer radio receiver might be built with all its circuitry on one circuit board, but a TV set would probably contain one or more circuit boards.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Printed_circuit_board

### Distribution media

- **Magnetic Stripe (1969) - IBM**

In 1969, IBM engineer Forrest Parry invented the magnetic stripe card that would become ubiquitous for credit/debit/ATM cards, driver's licenses, rapid transit cards, and a multitude of other identity and access control applications. IBM pioneered the manufacture of these cards, and for most of the 1970s, the data processing systems and software for such applications ran exclusively on IBM computers. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM

### TV

- **PAL patent (1962-1967) - Telefunken**: 

Phase Alternating Line (PAL) is a colour encoding system for analogue television. It was one of three major analogue colour television standards, the others being NTSC and SECAM. In most countries it was broadcast at 625 lines, 50 fields (25 frames) per second, and associated with CCIR analogue broadcast television systems B, D, G, H, I or K. 

PAL was developed by Walter Bruch at Telefunken in Hanover, West Germany, with important input from Gerhard Mahler [de].[4] The format was patented by Telefunken in 1962, citing Bruch as inventor,[5] and unveiled to members of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) on 3 January 1963. When asked why the system was named "PAL" and not "Bruch" the inventor answered that a "Bruch system" would probably not have sold very well ("Bruch" is the German word for "breakage"). The first broadcasts began in the United Kingdom in July 1967, followed by West Germany later that year.[6][7] The one BBC channel initially using the broadcast standard was BBC2, which had been the first UK TV service to introduce "625-lines" in 1964. Telefunken PALcolour 708T[8] was the first PAL commercial TV set. It was followed by Loewe-Farbfernseher S 920 and F 900.[9]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PAL

- **SECAM-I (1961-1967) - Thomson**

Development of SECAM predates PAL, and began in 1956 by a team led by Henri de France working at Compagnie Française de Télévision (later bought by Thomson, now Technicolor). NTSC was considered undesirable in Europe because of its tint problem, requiring an additional control, which SECAM (and PAL) solved.
The first proposed system was called SECAM I in 1961, followed by other studies to improve compatibility and image quality,[2] but it was too soon for a wide introduction. A version of SECAM for the French 819-line television standard was devised and tested, but not introduced.[3]
Following a pan-European agreement to introduce color TV only on 625-line broadcasts, France had to switch to that system, which happened in 1964 with the introduction of France 2, a second national TV network.

Further improvements to the standard were called SECAM II[2] and SECAM III, with the latter being presented at the 1965 CCIR General Assembly in Vienna, and adopted by France and the Soviet Union.[2][4]

SECAM was inaugurated in France on 1 October 1967, on la deuxième chaîne (the second channel),

Thomson bought the company that developed PAL, Telefunken, and today even co-owns the RCA brand – RCA being the creator of NTSC. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SECAM

- **TFT - ELD display invention (1962-1968)**

The MOSFET (metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor, or MOS transistor) was invented by Mohamed M. Atalla and Dawon Kahng at Bell Labs in 1959,[6] and presented in 1960.[7] Building on their work, Paul K. Weimer at RCA developed the thin-film transistor (TFT) in 1962.[8] It was a type of MOSFET distinct from the standard bulk MOSFET.[9] The idea of a TFT-based LCD was conceived by Bernard J. Lechner of RCA Laboratories in 1968.[10] B.J. Lechner, F.J. Marlowe, E.O. Nester and J. Tults demonstrated the concept in 1968 with a dynamic scattering LCD that used standard discrete MOSFETs.[11]

The first active-matrix addressed electroluminescent display (ELD) was made using TFTs by T. Peter Brody's Thin-Film Devices department at Westinghouse Electric Corporation in 1968.[12]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flat-panel_display

In 1964, George H. Heilmeier, then working at the RCA laboratories on the effect discovered by Williams achieved the switching of colors by field-induced realignment of dichroic dyes in a homeotropically oriented liquid crystal. Practical problems with this new electro-optical effect made Heilmeier continue to work on scattering effects in liquid crystals and finally the achievement of the first operational liquid-crystal display based on what he called the dynamic scattering mode (DSM). Application of a voltage to a DSM display switches the initially clear transparent liquid crystal layer into a milky turbid state. DSM displays could be operated in transmissive and in reflective mode but they required a considerable current to flow for their operation.[46][47][48][49] George H. Heilmeier was inducted in the National Inventors Hall of Fame[50] and credited with the invention of LCDs. Heilmeier's work is an IEEE Milestone.[51]

In the late 1960s, pioneering work on liquid crystals was undertaken by the UK's Royal Radar Establishment at Malvern, England. The team at RRE supported ongoing work by George William Gray and his team at the University of Hull who ultimately discovered the cyanobiphenyl liquid crystals, which had correct stability and temperature properties for application in LCDs.

The idea of a TFT-based liquid-crystal display (LCD) was conceived by Bernard Lechner of RCA Laboratories in 1968.[52] Lechner, F.J. Marlowe, E.O. Nester and J. Tults demonstrated the concept in 1968 with an 18x2 matrix dynamic scattering mode (DSM) LCD that used standard discrete MOSFETs.[53]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquid-crystal_display

- **first practical plasma video display (1964)**

The first practical plasma video display was co-invented in 1964 at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign by Donald Bitzer, H. Gene Slottow, and graduate student Robert Willson for the PLATO computer system.

The original neon orange monochrome Digivue display panels built by glass producer Owens-Illinois were very popular in the early 1970s because they were rugged and needed neither memory nor circuitry to refresh the images.[56] A long period of sales decline occurred in the late 1970s because semiconductor memory made CRT displays cheaper than the $2500 USD 512 × 512 PLATO plasma displays.[57] Nonetheless, the plasma displays' relatively large screen size and 1 inch thickness made them suitable for high-profile placement in lobbies and stock exchanges.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plasma_display

- **CRT improvements - Sony Trinitron (1968)**

In 1960, the Aiken tube was invented. It was a CRT in a flat-panel display format with a single electron gun.[59][60] Deflection was electrostatic and magnetic, but due to patent problems, it was never put into production. It was also envisioned as a head-up display in aircraft.[61] By the time patent issues were solved, RCA had already invested heavily in conventional CRTs.[62]

1968 marks the release of Sony Trinitron brand with the model KV-1310, which was based on Aperture Grille technology. It was acclaimed to have improved the output brightness. The Trinitron screen was identical with its upright cylindrical shape due to its unique triple cathode single gun construction.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cathode-ray_tube

### Video Games

- **Spacewar (1961)**
Spacewar! is considered one of the first recognized video games that enjoyed wider distribution behind a single exhibition system. Developed in 1961 for the PDP-1 mainframe computer at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), it allowed two players to simulate a space combat fight on the PDP-1's relatively simplistic monitor. The game's source code was shared with other institutions with a PDP-1 across the country as the MIT students themselves moved about, allowing the game to gain popularity.[4]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_video_games

- **Games on mainframes and minicomputers**
In the 1960s, a number of computer games were created for mainframe and minicomputer systems, but these failed to achieve wide distribution due to the continuing scarcity of computer resources, a lack of sufficiently trained programmers interested in crafting entertainment products, and the difficulty in transferring programs between computers in different geographic areas. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_video_games

- **Electro-mechanical games (EM games)**
The arcade video game industry grew out of the pre-existing arcade game industry, which was previously dominated by electro-mechanical games (EM games). Following the arrival of Sega's EM game Periscope (1966), the arcade industry was experiencing a "technological renaissance" driven by "audio-visual" EM novelty games, establishing the arcades as a healthy environment for the introduction of commercial video games in the early 1970s.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_video_games

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arcade_game#History


### Automation 
- **Automated Deposit Machine (1960)**

In 1960 Luther George Simjian invented an automated deposit machine (accepting coins, cash and cheques) although it did not have cash dispensing features.[17] His US patent was first filed on 30 June 1960 and granted on 26 February 1963

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_teller_machine

## Navigation
**[`^        back to top        ^`](#)**

**Multiple US DOD research : US Air Force MOSAIC (1960), US Army SECOR (1964), US NAVY Timation satellite (1967) lead to GPS** 

In 1960, the Air Force proposed a radio-navigation system called MOSAIC (MObile System for Accurate ICBM Control) that was essentially a 3-D LORAN. A follow-on study, Project 57, was performed in 1963 and it was "in this study that the GPS concept was born." That same year, the concept was pursued as Project 621B, which had "many of the attributes that you now see in GPS"[31] and promised increased accuracy for Air Force bombers as well as ICBMs.

Another important predecessor to GPS came from a different branch of the United States military. In 1964, the United States Army orbited its first Sequential Collation of Range (SECOR) satellite used for geodetic surveying.[33] The SECOR system included three ground-based transmitters at known locations that would send signals to the satellite transponder in orbit. A fourth ground-based station, at an undetermined position, could then use those signals to fix its location precisely. The last SECOR satellite was launched in 1969.[34]

In 1967, the U.S. Navy developed the Timation satellite, which proved the feasibility of placing accurate clocks in space, a technology required for GPS.

With these parallel developments in the 1960s, it was realized that a superior system could be developed by synthesizing the best technologies from 621B, Transit, Timation, and SECOR in a multi-service program. Satellite orbital position errors, induced by variations in the gravity field and radar refraction among others, had to be resolved. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_Positioning_System
