# 2020s

**Work in progress**

**In short:**
- Telecommunications : 
- Networking : Terabit ethernet, quantum key distribution
- Cryptography : 
- Computers:
  * Hardware : End of optic drives
  * CPU: 
  * Motherboard : 
  * Screens : 
  * Printers: 
- Uses:
  * Servers : 
  * GUI : 
- Consumer Electronics:
  * Distribution media : 
  * TV : shipment of LCD TV falls, from OLED to QD-LED
  * Satellite : 
  * Video games : Microsoft Xbox series, Sony PlayStation 5
- Standards and protocols : Terabit ethernet, HTTP/3, quantum key distribution
- Programming languages and frameworks : Microsoft .NET
- Navigation : 

## Telecommunications
**[`^        back to top        ^`](#)**

## Networking
**[`^        back to top        ^`](#)**



## Cryptography
**[`^        back to top        ^`](#)**

## Computers
**[`^        back to top        ^`](#)**

### Evolution of hardware

### Evolution of uses

## Consumer electronics
**[`^        back to top        ^`](#)**

### TV

- **from OLED / QDLED to QD-LED (2022+) - Sony, Samsung**

Fans of TV gear love to debate the merits of the two leading flat-panel technologies: Quantum Dot LED (or QLED TV as it’s most commonly known) and Organic LED, otherwise known as OLED TV. Each has its advantages, but also its weaknesses. But a new display technology called Quantum Dot OLED or QD-OLED, made its official debut at CES 2022 and is now being incorporated into TVs from Sony and Samsung, and computer monitors from Dell’s Alienware brand. We expect QD-OLED will eventually make its way into other form factors too, like in-car displays.

Simply put, QD-OLED is a hybrid display technology that aims to take the already very impressive qualities of OLED TV and improve on brightness and color through the use of quantum dots.

https://www.digitaltrends.com/home-theater/qd-oled-hybrid-display-technology-fully-explained/

- **shipment of LCD TV falls - Samsung cease LCD TV panel production (2022+)**

As at 2022:

LCD TV sales are expected to fall while OLED TV sales are expected to rise as the TV market is shifting towards the newer and more advanced display technology.

- "This year, the global OLED TV shipments are expected to increase 23 percent to eight million units," Omdia told BusinessKorea. "The market share of the product in terms of shipments is estimated at 4 percent this year, much lower than 96 percent of LCD TVs, and yet the share in terms of sales is expected to rise to 12.8 percent after having topped 10 percent for the first time last year."

Meanwhile, both LG Display and Samsung Display are downsizing their LCD TV panel business. Samsung Display is expected to cease LCD TV panel production entirely later this year.

https://www.flatpanelshd.com/news.php?subaction=showfull&id=1653035612


### Video games

- **XBox Series - SSD, 4K  and away from optic drive (2020) - Microsoft**

The Xbox Series X and the Xbox Series S (collectively, the Xbox Series X/S[b]) are home video game consoles developed by Microsoft. They were both released on November 10, 2020, as the fourth generation of the Xbox console family, succeeding the Xbox One. Along with Sony's PlayStation 5, also released in November 2020, the Xbox Series X and Series S are part of the ninth generation of video game consoles.[3]

As with the Xbox One line, the consoles utilize an AMD CPU and GPU. Both models feature a new storage architecture based around solid-state drives to reduce loading times, support for hardware-accelerated ray-tracing and spatial audio, the ability to convert games to high-dynamic-range (HDR) color using machine learning ("Auto HDR"), support for HDMI 2.1 variable refresh rate and low-latency modes, and updated controllers. Xbox Series X was designed to nominally render games in 2160p (4K resolution) at 60 frames per second (FPS). The lower-end Xbox Series S, which has reduced specifications and does not include an optical drive, was designed to nominally render games in 1440p at 60 FPS, with support for 4K upscaling.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xbox_Series_X_and_Series_S

- **Sony PlayStation 5 - Fastest selling Playstation (2020) - Sony**

The latest console in the series, the PlayStation 5, was released in 2020[6] and sold 10 million units in its first 249 days, unseating its predecessor as the fastest-selling PlayStation console to-date.[7]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PlayStation

The base model includes an optical disc drive compatible with Ultra HD Blu-ray discs. The Digital Edition lacks this drive, allowing it to serve as a lower-cost model for those who prefer to buy games through digital download. The two variants were launched simultaneously.

The PlayStation 5's main hardware features include a solid-state drive customized for high-speed data streaming to enable significant improvements in storage performance, an AMD GPU capable of 4K resolution display at up to 120 frames per second, hardware-accelerated ray tracing for realistic lighting and reflections, and the Tempest Engine allowing for hardware-accelerated 3D audio effects. Other features include the DualSense controller with haptic feedback and backward compatibility with the majority of PlayStation 4 and PlayStation VR games.

The PlayStation 5 was generally well received at launch, with much praise of its DualSense controller's improved haptic feedback and adaptive triggers.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PlayStation_5

## Some standards and protocols
**[`^        back to top        ^`](#)**

### Data layer

- **Y.3800 - quantum key distribution (2020)**

an ITU-T Recommendation (computer standard) with the long name "Overview on networks supporting quantum key distribution", that gives an overview of networks supporting quantum key distribution (QKD) cryptographic protocols.[1

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Y.3800

- **Terabit Ethernet**

The IEEE 802.3cm standard was approved on January 30, 2020 for 802.3cm	2020-01	400 Gbit/s over multimode fiber (four and eight pairs, 100 m)

The IEEE 802.3cu standard was approved on February 11, 2021 for 802.3cu	2021-02	100 Gbit/s and 400 Gbit/s over SMF using 100 Gbit/s lanes

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terabit_Ethernet

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_802.3

### Application layer

- **HTTP/3 (2022)**

HTTP/3 is the third major version of the Hypertext Transfer Protocol used to exchange information on the World Wide Web, complementing the widely-deployed HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2. Unlike previous versions which relied on the well-established TCP (published in 1974),[1] HTTP/3 uses QUIC, a multiplexed transport protocol built on UDP.[2] On 6 June 2022, IETF published HTTP/3 as a Proposed Standard in RFC 9114.[3]

HTTP/3 uses similar semantics compared to earlier revisions of the protocol, including the same request methods, status codes, and message fields, but encodes them and maintains session state differently. However, partially due to the protocol's adoption of QUIC, HTTP/3 has lower latency and loads more quickly in real-world usage when compared with previous versions: in some cases over 3× faster than with HTTP/1.1 (which remains the only HTTP version deployed by many websites).[4][5]

HTTP/3 is already supported by 75% of web browsers (and 83% of "tracked desktop" web browsers),[6] and 26% of the top 10 million websites.[7] It has been supported by Chromium (and derived projects including Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Samsung Internet, and Opera)[8] since April 2020 and by Mozilla Firefox since May 2021.[6][9] Safari 14 (on macOS Big Sur and iOS 14) has also implemented the protocol but it is disabled by default (also in Safari 15).[10]

HTTP/3 originates from an Internet Draft adopted by the QUIC working group. The original proposal was named "HTTP/2 Semantics Using The QUIC Transport Protocol",[11] and later renamed "Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) over QUIC".[12]

On 28 October 2018 in a mailing list discussion, Mark Nottingham, Chair of the IETF HTTP and QUIC Working Groups, proposed renaming HTTP-over-QUIC to HTTP/3, to "clearly identify it as another binding of HTTP semantics to the wire protocol [...] so people understand its separation from QUIC".[13] Nottingham's proposal was accepted by fellow IETF members a few days later. The HTTP working group was chartered to assist the QUIC working group during the design of HTTP/3, then assume responsibility for maintenance after publication.[14]

Support for HTTP/3 was added to Chrome (Canary build) in September 2019 and then eventually reached stable builds, but was disabled by a feature flag. It was enabled by default in April 2020.[15] Firefox added support for HTTP/3 in November 2019 through a feature flag[6][16][17] and started enabling it by default in April 2021 in Firefox 88.[6][9] Experimental support for HTTP/3 was added to Safari Technology Preview on April 8, 2020[18] and was included with Safari 14 that ships with iOS 14 and macOS 11,[10] but is still disabled by default.[19] The situation remained the same with Safari 15.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP/3

## Some programming languages and frameworks
**[`^        back to top        ^`](#)**

- **Microsoft .NET (2020+)**

In November 2020, Microsoft released .NET 5.0. The "Core" branding was removed and version 4.0 was skipped to avoid conflation with .NET Framework, which remains the Windows-specific product. It addresses the patent concerns related to the .NET Framework.[18]

In November 2021, Microsoft released .NET 6.0.[19]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/.NET



